







Environment crimes show decline: Activists cite under reporting








































































 

 



























 















Features
Videos Podcasts Specials Articles
Shorts 
Subscribe









English
Español (Spanish)
Français (French)
Bahasa Indonesia (Indonesian)
Brasil (Portuguese)
India (English)
हिंदी (Hindi)




Videos Podcasts Articles
Short News Feature Stories
The Latest
Explore All



About
Team
Contact


Subscribe page
Submissions


Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Advertising


Wild Madagascar
For Kids
Mongabay.org
Reforestation App


Planetary Health Check
Conservation Effectiveness
Mongabay Data Studio










Environment crimes show decline: Activists cite under reporting



 

Jaideep Hardikar

5 Jan 2018
Maharashtra 



Comments
Share article




Share this article
If you liked this story, share it with other people.





Facebook




Linkedin


Threads


Whatsapp


Reddit



Email 

Page link








 







Maharashtra had the highest number of cases related to the Environment Protection Act and Air Act.Many states reported zero violations, casting doubts about the reporting process.Activists says that the report has grossly under reported environmental crimes.See All Key Ideas 
Maharashtra topped the list of states with the highest number of cases pertaining to violations under the Environment Protection Act (EPA), 1986, and air pollution control rules, according to the ‘2016 Crime in India’ report released by the National Crime Record Bureau (NCRB) in late 2017. The report said 97 of the 120 EPA violations and 21 of the 25 excesses of the air pollution rules in India in 2016 were in Maharashtra. Twenty-two states reported zero violations.
Overall, Maharashtra recorded 170 environment-related offences in 2016, up from 136 in 2014 and 127 in 2015. These are offences under five major laws: 1) Forest Act, 1927; 2) Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, 3) EPA; 4) Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, and 5) Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974.
Maharashtra recorded 33 offences cases under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972; 19 violations under the Indian Forest Act, 1927; but zero violations under the Water Act. Together, under all five laws, the state accounted for 170 environment-related offences, the NCRB report said.
Experts feel that the rise in violations in Maharashtra does not reflect the grievous state of the environment; instead, it may merely suggest a better enforcement than other states. Last year, the World Health Organization (WHO) released a list of 30 most polluted cities in the world, which included Gwalior, Allahabad and Delhi, but none from Maharashtra.
The polluted Oshiwara river near Mumbai. Photo by Jan Jorg / Wikimedia Commons.
“We are regularly filing cases of environmental violations. There is no tolerance for such illegal acts,” said Satish Gavai, additional chief secretary to the state environment department, quoted in a story in the Hindustan Times. “There are very few isolated incidents like in Taloja industrial area, where there is connivance, but even there we are developing systems, which will eliminate human subjectivity and bring increased deterrence.”
In 2015 too, Maharashtra had recorded maximum violations in the country under Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 – that year, 42 of the 50 offences in India were from the state.
Are environmental crimes going down?
Rajasthan reported zero cases of violations under the Water Act, Air Pollution rules and the EPA, while Uttar Pradesh reported zero cases under Air Pollution and Water Act, but only 11 cases of violations under the EPA.
Environment-related offences across India have been on a steady decline – 5,835 cases in 2014, 5,156 in 2015 and 4,732 in 2016, the NCRB report said.
This year, across India, 8365 persons were arrested for environmental offences, of which 239 people – 234 men and five women — were arrested in Maharashtra, the NCRB report said.
‘Gross under-reporting’
“The data indicates gross under-reporting of environmental violations in the country,” environmental activist and researcher Shripad Dharmadhikary of the Manthan Adhyayan Kendra told Mongabay-India. “That so many states have no cases under EPA violations is unpalatable,” he said from Pune where he currently works on increasing compliance with environmental laws.
A polluted beach in Mumbai. Photo by Raju Kasambe / Wikimedia Commons.
Factor this, for instance: 12 of the 29 states did not report a single violation under Forest Act; six states had zero violations under the Wildlife Protection Act, though there were 852 cases registered in this category across India. Twenty-two states had zero EPA violations, and 120 cases were reported in the remaining states. Twenty-six states showed zero violations of Air Pollution rules, with only 25 cases filed nation-wide; and 25 states did not have a single case registered under the Water Act, under which only 11 cases were filed in the NCRB report.
The data collated by the NCRB actually hides more than it reveals, said activist, lawyer and President of the National Green Tribunal Bar Association (West Zone), Asim Sarode. “It is unbelievable that in Maharashtra shows zero cases under the Water Prevention and Preservation Act 1974 when I am myself dealing with various cases of water pollution before the National Green Tribunal (NGT),” he exclaimed. “It just means those cases haven’t been recorded in the state records bureau, which is why the NCRB data does not reflect the reality.”
According to Sarode, ground and surface water is getting contaminated. Various industries are violating the Water Act by releasing untreated effluents into natural water bodies. On one hand, the state pollution control boards are turning a blind eye towards implementation of environmental laws and rules, and on the other hand, the police force is not sufficiently equipped with the knowledge about how to take legal action against environmental offenders.



Credits  





 

Sandhya Sekar Editor













TopicsAir PollutionEnvironmental CrimeEnvironmental LawForestsLakesPeoplePollutionRiversWater PollutionWildlife Protection ActMaharashtraRajasthanSee Topics 












Climate Innovations







 

[Commentary] Climate considerations drive innovation in India’s agriculture and MSME sectors

Kundan Pandey
18 Oct 2024










 

A Jharkhand farmer uses AI and technology to modernise farming

Vishal Kumar Jain
16 Sep 2024










 

Polluting leather industry adopts sustainable practices to reduce environmental footprint

Zoya Ada Hussain
30 Aug 2024










 

Brick kilns embrace zigzag design to cut pollution and boost efficiency

Manish Chandra Mishra
27 Aug 2024










If the Green Revolution rode on the strength of chemicals derived mainly from fossil fuels, now there is a shift in the thinking on how agriculture is being done in India, with a thrust on growing indigenous crop varieties and following natural farming practices. In the industrial sector, with initiatives such as ‘Make in India’, […]


Climate Innovations series 










Free and open access to credible information


          Learn more






Latest articles
All articles





 

Global rift over plant treaty as key issues remain unresolved


Kundan Pandey
18 Jul 2025






 

A heat map-based plantation programme turns into a missed opportunity


Manu Moudgil, Simrin Sirur
18 Jul 2025






 

Assessment of Sikkim flood impact shows damage to fish habitats


Simrin Sirur
17 Jul 2025






 

The long road to regulating earth use for highways and railways


Akshay Deshmane
17 Jul 2025






 

Tracing a tiger from its kill


Bharti Dharapuram
16 Jul 2025






 

The long way might just be the right way for Montagu’s harriers


Sneha Mahale
16 Jul 2025






 

Tiger deaths reveal conservation challenges


Bharti Dharapuram
15 Jul 2025






 

Wetlands hold carbon and climate hope


Nandhini Somasundaram
14 Jul 2025





All articles






Subscribe


            Stay informed with news and inspiration from nature’s frontline.          

          Newsletter














News formats



Videos
Podcasts Articles
Specials
Shorts Features
The Latest




About



About
Contact
Impacts
Newsletters
Submissions
Terms of Use




External links



Wild Madagascar
For Kids
Mongabay.org
Reforestation App
Planetary Health Check
Conservation Effectiveness
Mongabay Data Studio




Social media



LinkedIn Instagram Youtube X Facebook Telegram Android App Apple News RSS / XML






				© 2025 Copyright Conservation news. Mongabay is a U.S.-based non-profit conservation and environmental science news platform. Our EIN or tax ID is 45-3714703.
			












